"eb" hints
==========

Fitting
-------

It is important to realise that not all of the parameters in the
"parm" vector are intended to be varied at once.  Indeed, one of them
does not do anything at all (INTEG) and two are degenerate because
they provide different ways to do the same thing (PHI0 and T0).

This section provides a brief overview of what is "typically" done
with the parameters for eclipsing binaries.  None of this is set in
stone, and particularly innovative analysis might allow some of the
common sources of uncertainties to be better accounted for in the
future.

Roughly speaking, in a double-lined, double-eclipsing binary solution
for the usual case of ground-based data in a single passband, the
following parameters would usually be fit from the light curves (and
an observed light ratio from spectroscopy in the case of grazing
eclipses, see below):

EB_PAR_J
EB_PAR_RASUM
EB_PAR_RR
EB_PAR_COSI
EB_PAR_M0

The following parameters describe the ephemeris, and are usually also
fit predominantly from the light curves, but need good initial guesses
(usually determined from times of minima, or box-fitting least-squares
analysis):

EB_PAR_P
EB_PAR_T0

If the orbit is eccentric (or not be assumed to be circular), the
following would also be fit:

EB_PAR_ECOSW
EB_PAR_ESINW

the light curves tend to provide nearly all of the information on
ECOSW from the relative timing of primary and secondary eclipse, but
ESINW can benefit greatly from a simultaneous solution of the
photometry and radial velocities.  Again, a good initial guess for
ECOSW is usually needed if the orbit is eccentric.

The values of the limb darkening (LDLIN*, LDNON*) and gravity
darkening coefficients (GD*) are usually fixed to theoretical values
(there tends to be little information on limb darkening in grazing
eclipses).  The reflection effect (REFL*) may be fit if there is any
information on it in the light curve.  This is usually possible for
one star only.  However, for most systems I work on (M-dwarfs, usually
with spots) it is very small and buried underneath much larger spot
modulations, and I tend to simply predict an approximate reflection
effect based on an assumed albedo.  The mass ratio (Q) comes from the
spectroscopic orbit, as does CLTT.

I haven't needed to touch TIDANG, most of my systems have not had
strong ellipsoidal variations.

PHI0 is usually fixed to zero when fitting for an ephemeris (P and T0).

Third light can be varied, but not always fit, because it has strong
degeneracies with other parameters.  I have tended to use discrete,
fixed values of it to gauge the effect of a certain quantity of
(often unknown) third light on the other parameters.  If an external
constraint on its value (e.g. from a third set of lines in spectra) is
available, this might be used to set L3 or a prior on it.

The spot model (ROT*, FSPOT*, OOE*) deserves some special mention for
systems where it is needed.  In most cases, only one modulation is
seen, so we have to make a choice about which star to assign it to,
which of course is usually not known (I recommend covering all
possibilities because they have different effects on the radii).

The rotation parameters (ROT*) can cause trouble to minimizers, so I
set the initial guess based on a standard periodogram analysis so the
minimizer doesn't have to do too much work.  For very short period
systems expected to be synchronized these might be fixed to 1.

The FSPOT and OOE*O parameters are not intended to be fit from the
data, there is usually no information in the light curve on them,
however they do influence the results, so their effect should be
considered carefully.  See Irwin et al. (2011) for an example of how
these were used.

The remaining parameters describe the sin + harmonic model and are fit
from the light curves (for the chosen star only, in most cases, unless
somebody comes up with a clever way to allow for the uncertainty in
which star is responsible for the modulations).

An alternative to the "built-in" spot model is also available.  The
"ol1" and "ol2" parameters allow arbitrary user-supplied time-series
to be used for the fractional light adjustment to the two stars due to
spots.  This is combined with the "built-in" spot model, but is really
intended to be used to replace it, by setting the appropriate
parameters (ROT*, OOE*) to zero.  The FSPOT parameters are still
needed, and behave as described above.

Notes on individual parameters
------------------------------

Central surface brightness ratio (J) / radius ratio (RR) and relation
to the eclipse depths.

 I have come across many misconceptions surrounding this, so please
 take care.  In particular, it is common (particularly for transiting
 planets) to see the approximation that the primary eclipse depth is
 the radius ratio squared.  This is only true if the secondary is
 completely dark and the eclipse is total, and is only exact if the
 primary is a uniformly illuminated disc (i.e. no limb darkening,
 gravity darkening, spots, etc.).  For a self-luminous secondary
 and/or a grazing eclipse, this idea can be very misleading.

 For systems of two self-luminous objects, particularly if the
 eclipses are grazing, a better way to think about the eclipse depths
 is that the ratio of the secondary eclipse depth to the primary
 eclipse depth is a measure of the surface brightness ratio (strictly
 speaking, under the eclipse chord), so is most closely related to
 the central surface brightness ratio parameter J.  Bolometric surface
 brightness is directly related to effective temperature by sigma
 Teff^4 where sigma is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, so in a crude
 sense J is also related to the effective temperature ratio between
 the two stars, although note that bolometric corrections are
 important when interpreting real data.

Third light (L3)

 Third light can have some fairly nasty degeneracies with other
 parameters in the model (particularly inclination for grazing
 geometries and radius ratio for total eclipses), and can be difficult
 to deal with using photometry alone if there is no external
 constraint on its value (e.g. from high-resolution imaging or
 spectroscopy).

Fitting grazing eclipses
------------------------

A number of cautions apply, particularly to the radius ratio, when
fitting grazing eclipses.

The radius ratio is usually not constrained very well (if at all) by
photometry alone for systems with components of nearly equal sizes and
a grazing geometry.  In the light curve, the effect of the radius
ratio is essentially only seen through higher order deviations in the
eclipse shape, which tend to be prone to contamination from
systematics in the photometry and can depend on assumptions such as
limb darkening coefficients.

For SB2s, this problem is usually solved by including an observed
spectroscopic light ratio in the model, so the radius ratio can be
determined.  For most cases involving ground-based data, the
spectroscopic constraint supplies nearly all of the information on the
radius ratio.  It may be important to ensure the spectroscopic light
ratio is measured at, or corrected to, the bandpass of the photometry.

During initial exploratory fitting when only photometry is available,
I often fix the radius ratio to a theoretical value estimated from
stellar models until a spectroscopic light ratio is available.
Otherwise, having an almost completely unconstrained parameter in the
fit can mess up the non-linear fitting.  I advise against trying to do
final scientific analysis of this type of grazing eclipsing binaries
without the spectroscopic constraint.

Caution is advised when trying to estimate uncertainties on the radius
ratio in grazing systems.  I have had a lot of trouble with the
uncertainties being underestimated, sometimes due to fitting or Monte
Carlo getting stuck.  If the system is grazing, I would be suspicious
if this parameter comes out with a relative error much less than the
square of the relative error in the spectroscopic light ratio, unless
the data are exceptionally good (Kepler?).

A useful additional sanity check is the observation that while the
models tend to underestimate the sum of the radii by up to 5-10
percent or so (this is the well known radius problem), the radius
ratio in near equal mass systems agrees very well with the models,
particularly in the best-measured systems.  Therefore a discrepant
radius ratio may be a sign of a problem with the analysis (or
observations).

As a related aside, the sum of the radii is often much better
constrained than the individual radii in grazing systems as a result
of the problems with the radius ratio.  It can be used directly for
comparison to models, by looking up the individual radii using the
individual masses from the spectroscopic orbit, summing the model
radii, and then comparing this quantity to the observed radius sum.
Of course, errors in the masses should be propagated carefully into
the model radii being compared when doing this.  For objects with
high-quality spectroscopic orbits, this can yield more constraining
results than attempting to compare the individual component radii
only.  See Irwin et al. (2011) on LSPM J1112+7626 for an example where
this was done.

When choosing priors on the radius ratio, please beware that values
greater than unity are perfectly reasonable when the geometry is
grazing.  Placing a boundary at unity is a specific choice of
informative prior and may not always be justified.

Fitting multi-band data
-----------------------

It is useful to make the distinction between radiative / photometric
parameters and geometric / orbital parameters for this purpose.  The
former set of parameters will (in general) need to be different for
each observed passband, whereas the geometric and orbital parameters
are the same.  Roughly speaking, the division is as follows.

Radiative / photometric parameters:

EB_PAR_J
EB_PAR_LDLIN1
EB_PAR_LDLIN2
EB_PAR_GD1
EB_PAR_GD2
EB_PAR_REFL1
EB_PAR_REFL2
EB_PAR_L3
EB_PAR_M0
EB_PAR_LDNON1
EB_PAR_LDNON2
EB_PAR_FSPOT1
EB_PAR_FSPOT2
EB_PAR_OOE1O
EB_PAR_OOE11A
EB_PAR_OOE11B
EB_PAR_OOE12A
EB_PAR_OOE12B
EB_PAR_OOE2O
EB_PAR_OOE21A
EB_PAR_OOE21B
EB_PAR_OOE22A
EB_PAR_OOE22B

Geometric / orbital parameters:

EB_PAR_RASUM
EB_PAR_RR
EB_PAR_COSI
EB_PAR_ECOSW
EB_PAR_ESINW
EB_PAR_Q
EB_PAR_PHI0
EB_PAR_P
EB_PAR_T0
EB_PAR_CLTT
EB_PAR_ROT1
EB_PAR_ROT2
EB_PAR_DWDT

There is not any explicit support for fitting multi-band data in a
single call to the model.  However, it can be achieved by separate
calls with different parameter vectors at the cost of a little waste.
The parameters common to all of the passbands (i.e. the set of
geometric / orbital parameters in the second list above) can be
tied together (i.e. only one set of these is needed to describe the
system itself).  However, the consistency of these parameters
determined independently from different passbands can be a useful
validation test.

Use for transit models
----------------------

While intended for eclipsing binaries, standard transiting planet
models can also be produced, albeit with some minor inefficiency due
to the extra calculations that are not used.  To obtain standard
transiting planet models, i.e. a dark secondary, no ellipsoidal or
reflection, set the following parameter vector entries to zero:

EB_PAR_J
EB_PAR_LDLIN2
EB_PAR_REFL1
EB_PAR_REFL2
EB_PAR_Q
EB_PAR_LDNON2

Light travel time is also usually neglected in transiting planet
analysis, although I suspect this is simply because it hasn't been
large enough to notice yet.  Allowing for it introduces a small offset
into the epochs of conjunction because the transit signal is emitted
at the position of the planet, which is closer to the observer than
the star and the system barycenter.  When the light travel correction
is enabled, the epoch of conjunction is reckoned as if it was being
communicated to the observer by a light signal emitted at the system
barycenter (for very small mass ratios, this is essentially how it
would be defined in radial velocities, i.e. from light emitted at the
star).  Therefore for compatibility with existing analysis the user
may wish or need to set EB_PAR_CLTT to zero, or adjust T0 to remove
the light travel time correction so it agrees with convention.

Note that neglecting light travel time can yield "false eccentricity",
which appears as a small contribution to e cos omega, when using
secondary vs primary eclipse timings.

In theory (with the caveat that I have not tried it), secondary
eclipses might be fit by varying EB_PAR_J, which essentially controls
the depth of secondary eclipse (relative to primary, approximately
speaking).  The reflection model is probably not applicable to
planetary phase curves, because it assumes no heat redistribution.

It is not currently possible to pass in the same "z0" (plane of sky
separation) vector as Mandel & Agol.  This is not necessarily a
disadvantage, the solution of Kepler's equation comes for free.

